README.md, before:

# Replication of "Nowcasting Macroeconomic Variables with a Sparse Mixed Frequency Dynamic Factor Model"
A revised version of the code used for the simulation study in "Nowcasting Macroeconomic Variables with a Sparse Mixed Frequency Dynamic Factor Model" by Dr. [Karsten Schweikert](https://github.com/karstenschweikert) and I.

## Introduction

This repository contains the replication code for the following working paper:

Franjic, Domenic and Schweikert, Karsten, *Nowcasting Macroeconomic Variables with a Sparse Mixed Frequency Dynamic Factor Model* (February, 2026). Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4733872 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4733872

The code simulates data from a dynamic factor model (DFM) and evaluates the performance using mean squared nowcasting error (MSNE). For detailed methodology and results, please refer to the [paper](https://ssrn.com/abstract=4733872).

## Features

- **Fast and Parallelised Cross-Validation**: Implements a parallelised random hyper-parameter search for efficient cross-validation.
- **Flexible Simulation Parameters**: Allows a high degree of customisation of the model parameterisation.
- **Compatibility**: Works on modern Windows and Linux operating systems.
- **Open-Source**: Distributed under the GNU General Public License v3.0.

## Prerequisites

- **Eigen** (version 3.4.0 or later): A C++ template library for linear algebra. [Eigen Website](https://eigen.tuxfamily.org/)
- **OpenMP-compatible C++ Compiler**: Such as GCC (version 5.0 or later) or MSVC (Visual Studio 2019 or later).

## Installation

1. Make sure that a compatible version of Eigen3 (3.4.0 or later) is installed.
2. Install a OpenMP compatible C++ compiler such as GNU C++ Compiler or MSVC.
3. Clone the Repository
   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/yourusername/ReplicationNowcastingMacroVarsWithSDFM.git
   cd ReplicationNowcastingMacroVarsWithSDFM
4. The repository is ready to compile. Using MinGW-w64 GCC with reasonable speed optimisation on windows, a potential compiler call could look something like this:
   ```bash
   g++ -std=c++14 -Wall -O3 -march=native -mfma -fopenmp -DNDEBUG -I "C:\Path\To\Eigen" SimulationStudyReplication.cpp Internals\*.cpp -o SimulationStudyReplication.exe
   ```
   On Linux, a possible compiler call might be
   ```bash
   g++ -std=c++14 -Wall -O3 -march=native -mfma -fopenmp -DNDEBUG -I /path/to/eigen3 SimulationStudyReplication.cpp Internals/*.cpp -o SimulationStudyReplication
   ```
   Note that the speed optimisations are highly encouraged due to the computational complexity of the cross-validation scheme.

## Usage

Most of the model parameters are set at compile time. However, it is possible to interrupt the simulations and restart them at a later time. To re-parameterise the simulation study, it is generally sufficient to change the "hard" parameters at the beginning of SimulationStudyReplication.cpp. Further or more general changes to the model parameterisation require a reformulation of the structure in the data-generating part of SimulationStudyReplication.cpp or at deeper levels.

## License

[![License: GPL v3](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-GPLv3-blue.svg)](LICENSE)

© 2024 Domenic Franjic

This project is licensed under the **GNU General Public License v3.0**. See the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

## Acknowledgements

This work is partially based on the LARS-EN and SPCA algorithms found in:

- Zou, H., Hastie, T., & Tibshirani, R. (2006). *Sparse Principal Component Analysis*. Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics, 15(2), 265-286.
- Normal Splines. (2019, February 25). Algorithms for updating the Cholesky factorization. Normal Splines Blog. (https://normalsplines.blogspot.com/2019/02/algorithms-for-updating-cholesky.html)

I also utilise the following libraries:

- **Eigen 3**: Guennebaud, G., Jacob, B., & Others (2010). *Eigen v3*. [http://eigen.tuxfamily.org](http://eigen.tuxfamily.org)
- **OpenMP**: OpenMP Architecture Review Board (2020). *OpenMP Application Programming Interface Version 5.1*. [https://www.openmp.org/spec-html/5.1/](https://www.openmp.org/spec-html/5.1/)

## Contributing

As this repo provides the code to replicate the results of our study, it is not possible to contribute.

## Support

If you have any questions or need assistance, please open an issue on the GitHub repository or contact us via email.

## Contact

- **Name**: Domenic Franjic
- **Institution**: University of Hohenheim
- **Department**: Econometrics and Statistics, Core Facility Hohenheim
- **E-Mail**: franjic@uni-hohenheim.de

Commit message:

Enhance README with simulation and empirical study details

README.md, after:

# Replication of "Nowcasting Macroeconomic Variables with a Sparse Mixed Frequency Dynamic Factor Model"
A revised version of the code used for the simulation study in "Nowcasting Macroeconomic Variables with a Sparse Mixed Frequency Dynamic Factor Model" by Dr. [Karsten Schweikert](https://github.com/karstenschweikert) and I.

## Introduction

This repository contains the replication code for the following working paper:

Franjic, Domenic and Schweikert, Karsten, *Nowcasting Macroeconomic Variables with a Sparse Mixed Frequency Dynamic Factor Model* (February, 2026). Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4733872 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4733872

## SimulationStudyReplication.cpp

This file, together with the routines in ``./Internals/``, provides the code to replicate the simulation results of our study.

### Features

- **Fast and Parallelised Cross-Validation**: Implements a parallelised random hyper-parameter search for efficient cross-validation.
- **Flexible Simulation Parameters**: Allows a high degree of customisation of the model parameterisation.
- **Compatibility**: Works on modern Windows and Linux operating systems.
- **Open-Source**: Distributed under the GNU General Public License v3.0.

### Prerequisites

- **Eigen** (version 3.4.0 or later): A C++ template library for linear algebra. [Eigen Website](https://eigen.tuxfamily.org/)
- **OpenMP-compatible C++ Compiler**: Such as GCC (version 5.0 or later) or MSVC (Visual Studio 2019 or later).

### Installation

1. Make sure that a compatible version of Eigen3 (3.4.0 or later) is installed.
2. Install a OpenMP compatible C++ compiler such as GNU C++ Compiler or MSVC.
3. Clone the Repository
   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/yourusername/ReplicationNowcastingMacroVarsWithSDFM.git
   cd ReplicationNowcastingMacroVarsWithSDFM
4. The repository is ready to compile. Using MinGW-w64 GCC with reasonable speed optimisation on windows, a potential compiler call could look something like this:
   ```bash
   g++ -std=c++14 -Wall -O3 -march=native -mfma -fopenmp -DNDEBUG -I "C:\Path\To\Eigen" SimulationStudyReplication.cpp Internals\*.cpp -o SimulationStudyReplication.exe
   ```
   On Linux, a possible compiler call might be
   ```bash
   g++ -std=c++14 -Wall -O3 -march=native -mfma -fopenmp -DNDEBUG -I /path/to/eigen3 SimulationStudyReplication.cpp Internals/*.cpp -o SimulationStudyReplication
   ```
   Note that the speed optimisations are highly encouraged due to the computational complexity of the cross-validation scheme.

### Usage

Most of the model parameters are set at compile time. However, it is possible to interrupt the simulations and restart them at a later time. To re-parameterise the simulation study, it is generally sufficient to change the "hard" parameters at the beginning of SimulationStudyReplication.cpp. Further or more general changes to the model parameterisation require a reformulation of the structure in the data-generating part of SimulationStudyReplication.cpp or at deeper levels.

## EmpiricalStudyReplication.r

This file provides the code to replicate the empirical results of our study (comming soon).

### Prerequisites

- **TwoStepSDFM**: A beta version of my ``R`` package that implements, among other things, the estimation, cross-validation, and nowcasting schemes outlined in our study. [TwoStepSDFM Github Repo](https://eigen.tuxfamily.org/](https://github.com/SiSanchopancho/TwoStepSDFM.git)

### Usage

Using the code is straightforward. Before using it for the first time, the data download block should be un-commented and executed in order to, load, pre-process and restructure the data vintages. After that, the script can be executed without modification.

## License

[![License: GPL v3](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-GPLv3-blue.svg)](LICENSE)

© 2024 Domenic Franjic

This project is licensed under the **GNU General Public License v3.0**. See the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

## Acknowledgements

This work is partially based on the LARS-EN and SPCA algorithms found in:

- Zou, H., Hastie, T., & Tibshirani, R. (2006). *Sparse Principal Component Analysis*. Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics, 15(2), 265-286.
- Normal Splines. (2019, February 25). Algorithms for updating the Cholesky factorization. Normal Splines Blog. (https://normalsplines.blogspot.com/2019/02/algorithms-for-updating-cholesky.html)

I also utilise the following libraries:

- **Eigen 3**: Guennebaud, G., Jacob, B., & Others (2010). *Eigen v3*. [http://eigen.tuxfamily.org](http://eigen.tuxfamily.org)
- **OpenMP**: OpenMP Architecture Review Board (2020). *OpenMP Application Programming Interface Version 5.1*. [https://www.openmp.org/spec-html/5.1/](https://www.openmp.org/spec-html/5.1/)

## Contributing

As this repo provides the code to replicate the results of our study, it is not possible to contribute.

## Support

If you have any questions or need assistance, please open an issue on the GitHub repository or contact us via email.

## Contact

- **Name**: Domenic Franjic
- **Institution**: University of Hohenheim
- **Department**: Econometrics and Statistics, Core Facility Hohenheim
- **E-Mail**: franjic@uni-hohenheim.de
